Create project README [9297] (#3)
eProsima/cpp-style: README.md

# Code Style for *eprosima Fast DDS*

This document describes the code style for the [*eprosima Fast DDS* project](https://github.com/eProsima/Fast-DDS) in order to improve the code readability and maintainability.

This code style is enforced through unit tests run automatically every time a pull request is done using [*uncrustify*](https://github.com/uncrustify/uncrustify).

> Latest results from these tests can be found [here](http://jenkins.eprosima.com:8080/job/fastdds_github_uncrustify/lastBuild/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The latest results from these tests can be found [here](http://jenkins.eprosima.com:8080/job/fastdds_github_uncrustify/lastBuild/).
```

These tests only run over those files where changes have been made.
Over time, this code style will apply to all source files.

## Language and Standard

*eprosima Fast DDS* project is mostly written in C++.

> The Standard followed is C++14.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The followed Standard is C++14.
```

## Formatting

The code style is formalized in the [uncrustify.cfg](uncrustify.cfg) file for the uncrustify tool.

> Below, the more important rules that are enforced are listed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most important rules that are enforced are listed below.
```

### Line length

The maximum line length is 120 characters.

### Character encoding

Non-ASCII characters should be rare and must use UTF-8 formatting.

### Indentation

Spaces are used for indentation instead of tabs.

Block indentation increases +4 spaces each time a new block or block-like construct is opened.
When the block ends, the indent returns to the previous indent level.

> If line-wrapping occurs an extra indentation of +8 spaces should be added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If line-wrapping occurs, an extra indentation of +8 spaces should be added.
```

### Vertical Whitespace

There must be one blank line between function or method declarations.

There must also be one blank line before and after access specifiers (`public`, `private` and `protected`) within a class definition.

Within a method or function declaration, there should be blank lines separating different functionalities.

> It should be convenient to start each functionality block with a comment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is convenient to start each functionality block with a comment.
```

### Horizontal Whitespace

> There should not be trailing whitespace at the end of the line.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There should not be any trailing whitespace at the end of the line.
```

Alternatives:
```
There should be no trailing whitespace at the end of the line.
```
```
There should not be trailing whitespaces at the end of the line.
```

#### General

> When declaring variables, there must be only one space between type and variable name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When declaring variables, there must be only one space between the type and the variable name.
```

If several variables are declared in the same line, there must be a space after the comma, but not before.

> This also applies in function declarations and callings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also applies to function declarations and callings.
```

This does not apply to unary logical operator `!` which should be written adjacent to the variable it affects.

Similarly, bitwise operators should have spaces around them, except the unary complement (bit inversion) operator `~` which should also be written adjacent to the variable it affects.

Comparison operators ought to have spaces around them too.

```c++
if (param1 == 0 && param1 > 3 || !param2)
{
}
```

There should be no space around member operators `.` and `->`.

Address-of `&` and de-reference `*` unary operators should be always adjacent to the variable they affect.

When overloading an operator, there should be a space between the `operator` keyword and the operator being overloaded.

```c++
Subscriber& Subscriber::operator <<(
        const qos::SubscriberQos& qos)
{
    this->qos(qos);
    return *this;
}
```

#### Templates

There should be a space between closing angles `>`.

```c++
std::map<std::string, std::vector<DataWriterImpl*> > writers_;
```

#### Line-end Comments

Lines that are non-obvious should get a comment at the end of the line.
These end-of-line comments should be separated from the code by a space.

### Function Declarations and Definitions

> To improve parameter readability, each parameter must be in its own line, even the first one and even if there is only one parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To improve parameter readability, each parameter must be in its own line, even the first one, and even if there is only one parameter.
```

The line-wrapping indentation is to be used in this case.

> Never indent to the opening parenthesis level, the first parameter, etc.

Reviewer 2: The first parameter, if the rules are followed, should be on its own line and indented with 8 spaces, just as the remaining parameters. This wording may cause some confusion. I'd simplify it for the sake of clarity.
```suggestion
Never indent to the opening parenthesis level.
```

The closing parenthesis `)` should be adjacent to the last parameter on the list.

The opening and close braces should be each alone in their own line.

Method definition should not have any indentation.

```c++
void EDPStatic::assignRemoteEndpoints(
        const ParticipantProxyData& pdata)
{
    // Method body
}
                                        // Blank line between methods
// Incorrect
void EDPStatic::assignRemoteEndpoints(const ParticipantProxyData& pdata)
{
    // Method body
}

bool EDPStatic::newRemoteReader(
        const GUID_t& participant_guid,
        const string_255& participant_name,
        uint16_t user_id,
        EntityId_t ent_id)
{
    // Method body
}
```

### Loops and Conditionals

There must always be braces `{ }`, even if there is no need (one line statements or even empty statements).
Additionally, both the opening and closing braces should be each alone in their own new line.

```c++
// Correct
if (!error)
{
    return success;
}

// Incorrect
if (!error)
    return success;

// Incorrect
if (!error) return success;
```

> ### Pointer and Reference Expressions

Reviewer 2: There is an exception when defining several pointers or references in the same line. In this case the `*` or `&` must be adjacent to the name:
```
int *value, *key;
```

Author: Introduced

Reviewer 3: Introduced

Reviewer 4: I disagree with @IkerLuengo as the `exception` breaks the rule, no exceptions should be allowed. Indeed, there should be forbidden to declare several variables in the same line. Always.

> When declaring a pointer or reference variable, the `*` or `&` must be always adjacent to the type and introduce a space before the variable name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When declaring a pointer or reference variable, the `*` or `&` must be always adjacent to the type and separated of the variable name by a space.
```

Reviewer 2: May I suggest `separated from` instead?

Author: I have opted for @IkerLuengo solution

This also applies when declaring a prototype and defining a function or method.

> In case of defining double pointers (pointer to pointer), there should be no space between the asterisks `*`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of defining double pointers (pointer to pointer), there should be no space between the asterisks `*`.
```

```c++
char* p;
int** ptr;
int& x;

const DomainParticipant* get_participant() const;
```

### Lambda Expressions

> Format parameters and bodies as for any other function, and capture lists like other comma-separated lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The format for parameters and lambda body should be as for any other function, and the capture lists like other comma-separated lists. 
```

> For by-reference captures, do not leave a space between the ampersand `&` and the variable name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In by-reference captures, do not leave a space between the ampersand `&` and the variable name.
```

There should not be a space separating the closing square bracket `]` from the opening parenthesis `(` when an argument list is present in the lambda expression.

> Lamba bodies should be indented following the indentation rules and both the opening and close braces should be each alone in their own line.

Reviewer 2: For coherence:
```suggestion
Lamba bodies should be indented following the indentation rules and both the opening and closing braces should be each alone in their own line.
```

```c++
    auto init_fun = [this, reader, &att, &rqos](
        ReaderProxyData* rpd,
        bool updating,
        const ParticipantProxyData& participant_data)
    {
        // Lambda Body
    };
```

### Class Format

Any base class name should be on the same line as the subclass name, subject to the 120-column limit.

The braces should open and close each in its own line.

> This also applies for structures `struct`, unions `union` and enumerates `enum`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also applies to structures `struct`, unions `union` and enumerates `enum`.
```

The `public:`, `protected:`, and `private:` keywords should not be indented.
Except for the first instance, these keywords should be preceded by a blank line.
There should be a blank line after these keywords.

```c++
class DomainParticipant : public Entity
{
public: // No indentation
                                                // Blank line
    RTPS_DllAPI ReturnCode_t get_qos(
        DomainParticipantQos& qos) const;
                                                // Blank line before
protected:
                                                // and after
    RTPS_DllAPI DomainParticipant(
            DomainId_t domain_id,
            const DomainParticipantQos& qos,
            DomainParticipantListener* listener,
            const StatusMask& mask = StatusMask::all());
};
```

### Constructor Initializer List

Constructor initializer parameters should be each in one line.

> Except the first parameter which is preceded by a colon `:`, the rest should have the comma `,` before the name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Except for the first parameter which is preceded by a colon `:`, the rest should have the comma `,` before the name.
```

> There should also be a space between the colon and the comma following the [horizontal whitespace rules](#horizontal-whitespace).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There should also be a space between the colon or the comma and the parameters following the [horizontal whitespace rules](#horizontal-whitespace).
```

The indentation in this case, instead of being +8 spaces, is only of +4 spaces.

```c++
DynamicType::DynamicType()
    : descriptor_(nullptr)
    , name_("")
    , kind_(TK_NONE)
    , is_key_defined_(false)
{
}
```

### Namespace Formatting

When declaring a namespace, the open brace should be in the same line as the declaration, separated one space from the namespace name.
This is the only exception in the code style where the opening brace is not in its own line.

Namespaces do not add an extra level of indentation.

> There should be a comment after the closing brace of the namespace, even more if the scope of the namespace is great enough and there may be doubts about which namespace is being closed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There should be a comment after the closing brace of the namespace, as if the scope of the namespace is great enough there may be doubts about which namespace is being closed.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There should be a comment after the closing brace of the namespace, as if the scope of the namespace is great enough, there may be doubts about which namespace is being closed.
```

```c++
namespace network {
namespace ip {

class IPv4 // Correct. No extra indentation in namespaces
{
public:

    long socket;
};

} // ip
} // network
```

### Templates

[//]: # (The uncrustify configuration file does not enforce that the template parameters should be each in a different line.)

> Template declaration should be in a different line from the entity it modifies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The template declaration should be in a different line from the entity it modifies.
```

```c++
template<typename K, typename V>
struct map_size_helper : public detail::pool_size_helper<detail::map_node_size<K, V>::value>
{
};
```

### Preprocessor Directives

The hash mark `#` that starts a preprocessor directive should always be at the beginning of the line.

> Even when preprocessor directives are within the body of indented code, the directives should start at the beginning of the line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even when preprocessor directives are within a block of indented code, the directives should start at the beginning of the line.
```

There should be a comment after `#endif` indicating the `#if` which is ending.

> This is even more important when the scope of the `#if` is great enough and there may be doubts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is even more important when the scope of the `#if` is great enough, and there may be doubts.
```

```c++
    ProtocolVersion_t():
#if HAVE_SECURITY
        // As imposed by DDSSEC11-93
        ProtocolVersion_t(2,3)
#else
        ProtocolVersion_t(2,2)
#endif // HAVE_SECURITY
```

> There must be spaces around preprocessor `##` concatenation operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There must be spaces around the preprocessor `##` concatenation operator.
```

```c++
#define PASTE2( x, y) x ## y
```

## Struct vs Classes

Use a struct only for passive objects that carry data; everything else is a class.
It is advisable that structs do not provide any method, although public access methods could be accepted.

> However, as the struct members should be public, there would be no need to provide those methods.

Reviewer 2: I'd be more strict and request all data in the struct to be public. The only case I can think of for non-public data is if the struct needs to keep an internal state, and in that case, it should be a class.
I don't know if uncrustify can enforce this, but we still should be able to state it in the style guide.

Author: Done.

If more functionality is required, a class is more appropriate.

> If in doubt, make it a class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is any doubt, make it a class.
```

## Naming

Use names that describe the purpose or intent of the object.
Minimize the use of abbreviations that would likely be unknown to people outside the project.
Do not abbreviate by deleting letters within a word.

```c++
// Correct
int stock_size;
int num_errors;

// Incorrect
int n;
int nerr;
int s_size;
```

### Filenames

File extensions `.cpp` and `.hpp` are used for source files with C++ code.
On the other hand, use `.c` and `.h` extensions if the file is in C code.

Filenames should be all lowercase and can include underscores `_`.

> However, class files which define or declare a class, should take the class name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, class files that define or declare a class should take the class name.
```

### Type Names

Type names start with a capital letter and have a capital letter for each new word, with no underscores.

> This convention is followed by all types: classes, structs, type aliases, enums and type template parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This convention is followed by all types: classes, structs, type aliases, enums, and type template parameters.
```

> Usually this convention is called *CamelCase*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, this convention is called *CamelCase*.
```

### Variable Names

The names of variables (including function parameters) and data members are all lowercase, with underscores between words.

> Data members of classes (but not structs) additionally have trailing underscore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data members of classes (but not structs) additionally have a trailing underscore.
```

All data members should be private.

> Accesors and mutators (get and set functions) will take the name of the variable they affect without the trailing underscore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessors and mutators (get and set functions) will take the name of the variable they affect without the trailing underscore.
```

```c++

> class Table
> {
> public:
> 
>     void row_count(
>             long count) { row_count_ = count; }
> 
>     long row_count() const { return row_count_; }
> 
>     long& row_count() { return row_count_; }
> 
> private:
> 
>     long row_count_;
> };

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
class Table
{
public:

    void row_count(
            long count)
    {
        row_count_ = count;
    }

    long row_count() const
    {
        return row_count_;
    }

    long& row_count()
    {
        return row_count_;
    }

private:

    long row_count_;
};
```

```c++
v = -5 * x + y / --z;

x += y++;
```

Logical operators `&&` and `||` should also have spaces around them.
This does not apply to unary logical operator `!` which should be written adjacent to the variable it affects.

Similarly, bitwise operators should have spaces around them, except the unary complement (bit inversion) operator `~` which should also be written adjacent to the variable it affects.

Comparison operators ought to have spaces around them too.

```c++
if (param1 == 0 && param1 > 3 || !param2)
{
}
```

There should be no space around member operators `.` and `->`.

Address-of `&` and de-reference `*` unary operators should be always adjacent to the variable they affect.

When overloading an operator, there should be a space between the `operator` keyword and the operator being overloaded.

```c++
Subscriber& Subscriber::operator <<(
        const qos::SubscriberQos& qos)
{
    this->qos(qos);
    return *this;
}
```

#### Templates

There should be a space between closing angles `>`.

```c++
std::map<std::string, std::vector<DataWriterImpl*> > writers_;

> ```

Reviewer 4: I think this is the ugliest thing anybody can write. Eases confusion with the `>` operator, and doesn't clarify anything.

Reviewer 5: Writing both angle brackets together (i.e. without a space in the middle), could also cause confusion with the `>>` operator, and is illegal on some old compilers. That said, support for `A<B<param>>` (without space) was added to the standard for C++11.

I see that we don't have a policy regarding closing parenthesis, so I think we should decide on both.

Should it be `my_function(my_adapter(param))` or `my_function(my_adapter(param) )` ?

My vote would go towards not using the space, being consistent with `my_function(param)`

Reviewer 4: We force at least C++11 compliance, so the lack of the space between the angle brackets should not be a problem.
Hence, my vote goes to not using the space as well.

Author: This rule has been modified. It also includes the rule about nested parentheses. uncrustify.cfg file updated accordingly.

{
    // Method body
}

bool EDPStatic::newRemoteReader(
        const GUID_t& participant_guid,
        const string_255& participant_name,
        uint16_t user_id,
        EntityId_t ent_id)
{
    // Method body
}
```

### Loops and Conditionals

There must always be braces `{ }`, even if there is no need (one line statements or even empty statements).
Additionally, both the opening and closing braces should be each alone in their own new line.

```c++
// Correct
if (!error)
{
    return success;
}

// Incorrect
if (!error)
    return success;

// Incorrect
if (!error) return success;
```

### Pointer and Reference Expressions

When declaring a pointer or reference variable, the `*` or `&` must be always adjacent to the type and separated from the variable name by a space.
There is an exception when defining several pointers or references in the same line. In this case the `*` or `&` must be adjacent to the name. 
This also applies when declaring a prototype and defining a function or method.

In the case of defining double pointers (pointer to pointer), there should be no space between the asterisks `*`.

```c++
char* p;
int** ptr;
int& x;

> int *value, *key;

Reviewer 4: No exceptions!

Reviewer 5: I agree with @LuisGP here. I think we should add a rule saying that we don't allow several declarations on the same line.

Author: The rule has been included.

There should not be a space separating the closing square bracket `]` from the opening parenthesis `(` when an argument list is present in the lambda expression.

Lamba bodies should be indented following the indentation rules and both the opening and closing braces should be each alone in their own line.

```c++
    auto init_fun = [this, reader, &att, &rqos](
        ReaderProxyData* rpd,
        bool updating,
        const ParticipantProxyData& participant_data)
    {
        // Lambda Body
    };
```

### Class Format

Any base class name should be on the same line as the subclass name, subject to the 120-column limit.

The braces should open and close each in its own line.
This also applies to structures `struct`, unions `union` and enumerates `enum`.

The `public:`, `protected:`, and `private:` keywords should not be indented.
Except for the first instance, these keywords should be preceded by a blank line.
There should be a blank line after these keywords.

```c++
class DomainParticipant : public Entity
{
public: // No indentation
                                                // Blank line
    RTPS_DllAPI ReturnCode_t get_qos(

>         DomainParticipantQos& qos) const;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            DomainParticipantQos& qos) const;
```

Author: Thanks for finding it out!

class IPv4 // Correct. No extra indentation in namespaces
{
public:

    long socket;
};

} // ip
} // network
```

### Templates

[//]: # (The uncrustify configuration file does not enforce that the template parameters should be each in a different line.)

The template declaration should be in a different line from the entity it modifies.

```c++
template<typename K, typename V>
struct map_size_helper : public detail::pool_size_helper<detail::map_node_size<K, V>::value>
{
};
```

### Preprocessor Directives

The hash mark `#` that starts a preprocessor directive should always be at the beginning of the line.
Even when preprocessor directives are within a block of indented code, the directives should start at the beginning of the line.

There should be a comment after `#endif` indicating the `#if` which is ending.
This is even more important when the scope of the `#if` is great enough, and there may be doubts.

```c++
    ProtocolVersion_t():
#if HAVE_SECURITY
        // As imposed by DDSSEC11-93
        ProtocolVersion_t(2,3)
#else
        ProtocolVersion_t(2,2)
#endif // HAVE_SECURITY
```

There must be spaces around the preprocessor `##` concatenation operator.

```c++

> #define PASTE2( x, y) x ## y

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#define PASTE2(x, y) x ## y
```

Author: Done
